Title: 2608.18902v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.18902v1

Published Time: Thu, 20 Aug 2026 00:52:52 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
Towards  Lawful ISAC  in  Cellular Networks 

## Stefano Tomasin 1* , Annalisa Volpato 2, and Marco Centenaro 1 

> 1

Dep. Of Information Engineering,  University of Padova, Italy  

> 2

Dep . of Public, International and EU Law,  University of Padova, Italy 

* Corresponding author  – email:  Stefano.tomasin@unipd.it 

ABSTRACT 

Integrated sensing and communication (ISAC)  enable s the tracking and detection of passive objects, 

including the human body, by leveraging standard wireless communication signals. While already 

standardized in IEEE 802.11bf for Wi -Fi, ISAC is currently being defined by 3GPP for  the  upcoming 

generations  of  cellular networks. This transition scales  the  ISAC  technology  from localized, 

uncoordinated Wi -Fi deployments into a pervasive, centralized  network deployment  managed by 

mobile network  operators. However, such nationwide coverage introduces critical user privacy 

challenges that must comply with stringent data protection  legislative  frameworks, most notably the 

General Data Protection Regulatio n in the European Union . This paper provides a comprehensive 

analysis of  applica ble norms  to c ellular ISAC, highlights the open technical challenges in its 

implementation, and explores potential mitigation strategies at both the architectural and signal -

processing levels , establishing tiered data access levels for various stakeholder categories and detailing 

how these protocols can be  lawfully  integrated into cellular network architectures. 

INTRODUCTION 

Wireless networks  have  experienced  a massive performance improvement in the last two decades 

thanks to t wo main  solutions , i.e., Wi -Fi and mobile networks,  which  evolved over several  standard 

releases . Recently,  the  Institute of  Electrical  and  Electronic Engineering  (IEEE) has  enhanced Wi -Fi to 

support , along with the traditional communication service,  a new  sensing service , i.e.,  the capability of 

estimating the range, velocity, and motion of objects . Both services  rely on processing the  same wireless 

signal, which is  generated for the two purposes : while communication is achieved by modulating the 

transmitted signal with the intended message, sensing is achieved by estimating at the receiver the 

effects of the  propagation environment over which the signal propagates . This dual -service technology 

is denoted  as  integrated sensing and communication (ISAC).  Along the same line, the  third -generation 

partnership project (3GPP) decided to insert ISAC  in  forthcoming  releases,  and  technical details are 

now  under discussion.  ISAC paves the way for new services  that typically can be clustered into (i) 

object detection and tracking, (ii) environmental monitoring, and (iii) motion monitoring. 

While ISAC  poses several technical  challenges,  it also  entails relevant  legal issues . On one hand ,

sensing  may carry  information  on  the position, movements, and in general the behavior of  human s (as better detailed in the following)  potentially  affect  our  privacy.  On the other hand,  the  legislat ors  are 

imposing strict requirements on data handling to protect  privacy , with  the most relevant act  being the 

European Union  (EU) ’s  General Data  Protection  Regulation  (GDPR)  [1] . In this perspective,  th e

privacy  risk  entail ed  by  ISAC in  Wi -Fi and mobile networks  is  extremely different . Indeed,  while  ISAC 

data collection is  localized  and  uncoordinated  in  Wi -Fi  networks , it becomes  pervasive  and centralized 

in mobile networks . Moreover,  on  mobile  networks,  the  information collected with  ISAC can  be 

distributed to several  stakeholders  at different  levels . The more extensive privacy implication then  calls 

for  a tech -policy approach  in the design of the upcoming  sixth generation  (6G) system  (6GS) , in which 

the engineering and  law communities  cooperate in  defin ing technical  solutions  to ripe the benefit of 

ISAC  while  ensuring compliance with regulations .

The objective of this paper is to investigate such a trade -off,  in order to  initially  identify insights  that 

are valid across specific wireless technologies,  before  focus ing specifically  on  cellular networks  to 

characterize its ecosystem, stakeholders, and related threats , allowing to  shed light on a topic that should 

be of interest for  the  design of the next releases. 

ISAC  STANDARD TRENDS 

ETSI has provided a general scheme for an ISAC  task , which has been  extended by the authors  and 

reported  in  Figure  1. The  sensing  task  leverages  a sensing  signal , that is exchanged between  two sensing 

entities  within a Target Sensing  Service Area (TSSA) , namely  a transmitter  and a  receiver , yielding 

sensing  data  which, after  processing , may produce  results  about the objects  within the TSSA , e.g., 

characteristics of objects per se, such as type, distance, velocity, trajectory, size, shape, material, or 

regarding the surrounding environment . Such a simple scheme capture s both the  technical  steps  needed 

to obtain the sensing results, as well as the entailed  processing  of the sensing information before it is 

delivered to the  sensing user . We will see that all these parts are relevant in achieving the privacy target. 

For the technical part of sensing acquisition, w e can distinguish  between  three  types  of  sensing : (i) 

monostatic , when the sensing transmitter and receiver  coincide , ii)  bistatic , when transmitter and 

receiver are  two  distinct devices , and  (iii)  multistatic , when  more than one transmitter and receiver are 

involved . Such types again are relevant for privacy since they  involve  different  actors receiving the 

sensing signal, which are the first  ones  responsible for handling the  sensed information  and passing it 

to the processing block and sensing result users . Moreover,  the signal  transmitter has also the 

responsibility of ensuring that the signal can be used only by receivers authorized to handle  the sensing 

information. Figure  1: Typical w orkflow of  a sensing  task .

Notably, both prominent  terrestrial wireless  technologies , i.e.,  IEEE’s  Wi -Fi and  3GPP’s  5G, have been 

progressing in integrating ISAC capabilities in their  latest standard releases. 

IEEE 802.11bf.  ISAC has been introduced  in the recently approved IEEE 802.11bf standard , operating 

both in  sub -7 GHz and  in  the 60 GHz  frequenc y bands . The standard primarily extracts environmental 

intelligence  by  analyzing  Channel State Information (CSI)  rela tive  to  orthogonal frequency -division 

multiplexing (OFDM) subcarriers , or , for millimeter -wave operations,  by  means of  beamforming 

technique s and narrow antenna patterns.  Monostatic, bistatic, and multistatic topologies  are supported ,

with  the  role of  sensing  initiator  and  responder  that  can  be  taken by  both access points (APs) and client 

stations (STAs) , with  se nsing  performance  including , e.g.,  range resolution  of  0.5 -2 m,  velocity 

resolution of  0.5 m/s, and  angular resolution of  4-6 degrees .

Privacy Requirements.  Since sensing information can be processed either at the AP or the STA, data is 

collected and processed locally only, even though the standard does not indicate where sensing results 

can be forwarded.  To p rotect  privacy, the IEEE 802.11bf standard embeds features such as MAC 

address randomization and secure session keys. However, these solutions only prevent unauthorized 

third parties from exploiting sensing traffic for illicit surveillance : the responsibility of surveillance 

through sensing  rests  on the owner of the wireless local area network. 

3GPP  5/6G . 3GPP  identified 32  sensing  use cases  for advanced fifth -generation (5G -Advanced) mobile 

networks  [2] , including, e.g., object and intruder detection for smart home, on a highway, for railways, 

for factory, for predefined secure areas around critical infrastructure , c ollision avoidance and trajectory 

tracking of  unmanned aerial vehicles ( UAVs ), vehicles,  automated guided vehicles ( AGVs ), p ublic 

safety search and rescue , r ainfall monitoring and flooding , and h ealth and sports monitoring . Moreover, dedicated  requirements on  wireless  sensing  performance  and sensing  service  design  ha ve  already  been 

defined  for  5G -Advanced  [3] . Several key performance indicators (KPIs) are defined  on three general 

types of scenarios (object detection and tracking, environmental monitoring , and motion monitoring) ,

including, e.g. , accuracy of  horizontal and vertical  positioning estimate  (<10 m)  and  velocity estimate 

(typically  <1 .5m/s)  as well as  missed detection  and false alarm  probabilit ies (<5%) . In terms of signals 

used for sensing, 3GPP  is  currently  studying how to satisfy such requirements  on the air interface ,

considering  OFDM as baseline waveform  [4] . Assuming  that  each  base station can  control multiple 

transmission -reception points (TRPs) , there are 6 possible  mode  variants of monostatic and bistatic 

sensing : TRP monostatic,  user equipment ( UE ) monostatic;  TRP -TRP bistatic, TRP -UE bistatic, UE -

TRP bistatic, UE -UE bistatic . Multiple  types of measurements are being considered,  ranging from  raw 

data ( i.e., amplitude and phase samples)  per OFDM symbol at the various antenna ports of the  TRPs 

(Level A) to  object/target level measurement per base station (Level D) .

An architectural  description  of  cellular network  ISAC well aligned to the  general ETSI  ISAC 

framework  is  provided again  by  ETSI  through the  Industry Specification Group (ISG) on ISAC . In  [5] ,

the  reference model i llustrated in  Errore. L'origine riferimento non è stata trovata.  has been 

proposed , comprising  the  Sensing Service  Producer  (SSP)  which interacts with the Sensing Input Data 

Provider  (SIDP ) and the third -party  Sensing  Input Data Provider (3 -SIDP) . The former  include s UEs 

and Access Nodes  while the latter  is  an authorized entity, not part of 6GS,  such as, e.g., an ISAC -

capable Wi -Fi AP as described earlier : together, they  provide input sensing data needed to implement 

the 6G Sensing Service . As far as the sensing procedure is concerned, the request  for a new Sensing 

Service may originate within the 6GS  by a Sensing Service  Consumer  (SSC) , which may include UEs, 

Access Nodes, and Core Network Functions  [5] . Note that  a sensing service request  may  also reside 

outside the 6GS , thus  denoted  a third -party Sensing Service Consumer (3 -SSC ), to  cover the case of  an 

application  function  in the data network or on the UE  itself  request ing  and consum ing  the  6G Sensing 

Service.  The various  entities interact according to a  service -based  request/response paradigm  (cf. *_req 

and *_res interactions in  Figure  2). Moreover,  it is worth noting that while RAN, SSP, and SSC 

functions are logically part of the 6GS, their operation is not necessarily carried out  directly  by the 

mobile network operator ( MNO ). Modern network deployments increasingly rely on specialized third -

party operators for managing specific network segments, making , e.g.,  their vendors  active  data 

processors rather than mere equipment suppliers  [6] .

When compared with the  Wi -Fi  scenario  we note that a) the sensing information is collected across a 

network that may extend into an entire nation (and beyond); b) the sensing signal is  received  by either 

the gNB or the UE ; c) the UE may act as a signal receiver, but then forward the sensing information to 

the RAN;  the network includes specific functions for the processing of the sensing information and its 

forward to  external users. Thus, in terms of  privacy,  ISAC in 6G is a much more challenging problem 

for the number  and type  of actors involved  and  the spatial extension of the sensing data collection .Figure  2: 6GS reference model for  the sensing service. 

Privacy Requirements.  The necessity to address  confidentiality, integrity, and privacy  of sensing 

capabilities was already addressed in  [2] . In fact , preliminary  considerations dedicated to privacy  are 

present  at service requirement level in  [4, Sec. 4.3, 5.2.4], however with generic statements on the need 

to protect the sensing data from unauthorized access, interception and eavesdropping, but also to make 

sure  such  service  is following  regulatory requirements. It is particularly stressed that tracking can be 

extended to people not carrying  a UE , which  makes  sensing even more problematic for privacy.  [5]  also 

recognizes the  need for integration of security and privacy , to which ETSI has  recently  devoted  [7] ,

which contains a list of key issues, description of relevant threats, and definition of potential 

requirement for security  and privacy . Here we consider threat s, introduce the concept of  signal 

controller  (as complementary to data controller) and thoroughly map the  expended 6GS  ecosystem  to 

GDPR  categorization. 

Based on the se  considerations , we will  analyze the relevant legislative framework with respect to the 

more impactful scenario of mobile networks .

RELEVANT  LEGISLATI VE  FRAMEWORK 

Privacy and data protection are fundamental rights generally protected across the world. Although 

GDPR specifically applies where  either  the processing of data is carried out by a natural or legal person 

established in the EU or the data concern a person who is in the EU, the GDPR set s a golden standard 

of legal protection which has strongly influenced the development of data protection law in many other 

jurisdictions, including the California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) in the USA  [8]  and Brazil's Lei 

Geral de Proteção de Dados Pessoais (LGPD)  [9] . Moreover, as far as  the protection of privacy in the 

electronic communications sector in the EU is concerned,  the  eP rivacy Directive  [10]  introduces even stronger confidentiality for the storing of information and gaining access to information stored in 

terminal  equipment. 

Scope of  Application.  The GDPR  sets  strict limits on the processing of any information relating to an 

identified or identifiable natural person ( data subject ). A person is identifiable when the information 

contains an identifier such as a name, an identification number, location data, an online identifier or one 

or more factors specific to the physical, physiological, genetic, mental, economic, cultural or soc ial 

identity of that natural person. These data are considered personal data ( or  personal identifiable 

information, PII) as opposed to data  anonymized  or not concerning an individual, which  do  not fall 

under the scope of the GDPR.  Specific data  categories, such as data revealing racial or ethnic origin, 

political opinions, religious or philosophical beliefs, or trade union membership, genetic data, biometric 

data, data concerning health or a natural person's sexual  life or  orientation, are granted enhanced 

protection under Article 9  of the  GDPR  (sensitive data) .  

> Figure 3:Target types in 6GS .

According to  [7] , there  are  six  types of sensing targets within a TSSA, namely  (see  Figure  3):

• Type A: people with  an  ISAC -enabled device; 

• Type B: people without a device; 

• Type C: people with a device connected to the network for communication purposes only; 

• Type D: fixed or mobile objects connected to the network for both communication and sensing 

(like, e.g., connected vehicles); 

• Type E: fixed objects not connected to the network (such as, e.g., buildings); 

• Type  F: mobile objects not connected to the network (e.g., vehicles without network 

connectivity). Figure  4: Main stakeholders in the ISAC  privacy of  6GS. 

Clearly, GDPR rules  do not  apply to Type s D, E, and  F categories  as they do not  concern  huma ns. 

About the first thr ee categories , in 6G networks the distinction between  identifiable  and non -identifiable 

person  may be particularly complex due  to the  high amounts of data  and signals , the integration with 

AI models, and the interaction with devices linked to specific user identifiers, which can lead to 

potential re -identification  of anonymous data  and extraction of vast amounts of personal data. In fact, 

while, on the one hand, ISAC -based monitoring of the environment does not rely on audio or video 

signals like  close circuit television ( CCTV ) cameras ( which are clearly personal data ), on the other hand 

it may give rise to link ing , identifiability, detectability, data disclosure, tampering, and spoofing  issues 

[11] . This would  result  in the processing of data which, by nature or by correlation with other 

information detained by the  MNO , may identify a natural person. Therefore, all sensing targets of Type 

A, B, and C categories potentially fall into the scope of GDPR application.  For  this analysis, we assume 

that  personal data (or PII) include, at least, user location and movement patterns, while  sensitive data 

includes , at least, biometric and behavioral data. 

Roles  and  Responsibilities . Where the GDPR is applicable, natural and legal persons processing data 

acquire specific roles and responsibilities defined in legislation. In particular, the natural or legal person, 

public authority, agency or other body which, alone or jointly with othe rs, determines the purposes and 

means of the processing of personal data is defined as  a data  controller . The data controller may rely 

on the work of a data processor which processes personal data on behalf of the controller ( data 

processor ) and may transfer the data to a third party ( data recipient ). The data controller and, to a certain 

extent, the data processor are subject to specific obligations vis -à-vis the data subject; the qualification 

as data controller or data processor is therefore key to determining the lawful  behavior  of the actor.  To 

stress the peculiarities of the communication systems while still connecting them to the GDPR,  we 

introduce the  figure of the  signal controller , in charge of managing  the transmission and reception of 

sensing -capable signals.  This figure is analogous to the data controller defined in the GDPR. However, here the data are physical -layer signals, which have a wider attack surface because they are transmitted 

through the air. These signals cannot be protected by cryptographic mechanisms alone, but rather 

require specific solutions, such as  physical -layer security .

We now a ssociate the stakeholders with the technical features involved in the overall sensing service 

and the subjective categories of the GDPR , as also depicted in  Figure  4:

• Network end users, belonging to either  Type A or C : They are generally data  subjects , as data 

concerning them is collected and transmitted through the service. However, these end users may 

become SSCs  when  they request a 6G Sensing Service . On the other hand, an end user with a ISAC 

UE providing ISAC information to the network is a SIDP.  Accordingly , they can be considered 

data processors and even data /signal  controllers if the processing of data is carried out on their 

behalf. In the following, we assume, for simplicity, that they are served by their home network , thus 

no roaming scenario is considered .

• People not owning a UE, that are,  Type B sensing targets : They are data subjects .

• MNO s: They  take care of the sensing data collection regarding end users, coordinating  their  own 

vendors as well  as  third -party platforms. They are typically  data  controllers in most use  cases  of 

ISAC. However, they may be required to make data available to  the public  sector body , e.g. for law 

enforcement or for exceptional needs under Art. 14  of the  EU’s  Data Act  [12] ; in that case they 

qualify as data processors .

• The  provider  of the radio access network  (RAN)  functionality : RAN equipment , once typically 

supplied  by vendors,  could be  provided as  a managed  service to  MNOs. In the latter case,  the RAN 

functionality provider  acts  as data processors  and signal controllers  on behalf of  the MNO .

• The  provider  of the SSP functionality : SSP functionality vendors may operate sensing data 

processing on behalf of the MNO, particularly when specialized  artificial intelligence/machine 

learning (AI/ML) and/or public cloud platforms  AI/ML or cloud platforms are involved, thus acting 

as data processors ;

• 3-SIDP equipment.  This category includes , e.g.,  Wi -Fi networks  feeding sensing data to the  SSP 

(see  Figure  3), thus acting as data controllers and processors. 

• 3-SSC platforms : They  can be the  MNO  itself  (especially  if  transitioning to  the so -called  tech -co 

model ) or an application function (e.g., representing an over -the -top service provider)  and  can be 

data recipients.  Th is stakeholder is the final  beneficiary  of the  ISAC information to implement one 

of the use cases listed above.  If they store or further transmit data, they become data processors or 

even data controllers if the processing of data is carried out on their behalf .

• Standardization bodies : RAN  and SSP are manufactured (and sold by vendors) in accordance  with 

the 3GPP standard. Therefore , standardization bodies are also stakeholders  that must  consider  the 

obligations of  GDPR. • Legal obligations and limits to processing.  The processing of personal data is allowed only  based 

on  specific conditions,  most notably  the consent of the data subject , which  must be  free, specific, 

and informed  as  to the purpose of proce ssing  [1, Art.  6 and  7]. Transparency shall be ensured to the 

data subject before and during the processing.  In the telecommunications sector,  the  eP riv acy 

Directive introduces e ven  st ricter requirements , al lowing  traffic  and location  data  to  be processed 

only anonym ized  or with the  ex plicit  user's  consent. 

Data controllers and data processors shall  further  comply (and be able to show compliance) with the 

privacy -by -design and privacy -by -default principles, which require to systematically limit data 

processing to the minimum and embed data protection mechanisms in the structural design of the 

system , under penalty  of  considerable  administrative fines  and  to  damage  liability.  The  only exce ption 

is made for  public authorities , which  may process personal data without the con sent of the data subject 

to  public interest, such as law enforcement or national security, upon conditions established by national 

law. 

In  th is  intricate  ecosystem, it is  evident  that  if the  extended  6GS  (comprising third parties ) fails to adhere 

to  privacy -preserving  policies,  obtain  sensing consent , and  maintain  transparency  regarding  data 

subjects , ISAC technology may  violate  privacy regulations  such as  GDPR  and E -Privacy Directive .

This could  potentially  compromise  the security and privacy of individuals' sensing data,  resulting in 

regulatory non -compliance  [7] . In particular , the following  specific  threats  may be identified: 

• Unauthorized data collection : PII and  sensitive data may be collected from the TSSA  without 

the knowledge or consent of individuals , thus lacking the mandatory legal basis for lawful 

proce ssing  and  transparency .

• Unauthorized data processing : Collected sensitive data and PII may be  further  processed 

without the knowledge or consent of individuals  and/or exploiting techni cal means  that are 

outside the scope of the  contractual  agreements  with the data subject .

• Data misuse : The sensing data collected  and processed  for one  specific  purpose could be 

repurposed for unauthorized applications that involve , e.g.,  surveillance or profiling , thus 

lacking the  specific consent of the data subject  for  further  processing  and transparency .

• Unawareness of involvement : The  end user  may inadvertently participate in sensing data 

collection and processing , without awareness of the change in roles and without the appropriate 

safeguards .

• Unintended disclosure : High -resolution sensing data and meta information obtained during the 

sensing process could inadvertently capture identifiable information (e.g. , home addresses or 

personal activities) and expose it to unauthorized parties .

In the light of the  kind of  data  processed , the different roles played by the main actors in the process, 

and the threats to privacy identifie d, the use of 6GS  appears particularly complex and problem atic from a privacy compliance perspective.  Table  1 provides an overview of the identified stakeholders, their 

role as per the GDPR, and the applicable threats. 

As already mentioned,  when we refer to RAN  equipment  and SSP functionality  vendors,  we indirectly 

refer also to standardization bodies that define the functionalities of the 3GPP standard, after which 

RANs and SSPs are then designed and implemented.  Thus,  whatever is relevant for these  vendors  is 

also relevant from a definition and design perspective for the manufacturers. Table  1: Threat assessment of ISAC -powered mobile networks. 

Stakeholder  Role  Envisioned threat  Comment 

Network 

end users 

Data subject  Unawareness of 

involvement 

Hardware and software of the end user may 

participate in sensing data collection and processing. 

Data recipient  Data misuse 

Upon requesting a Sensing Service for a given UE -

side application (e.g.,  a navigation or obstacle -

avoidance app ), such data are used for a different 

purpose (e.g.,  building a behavioral profile of the user 

for targeted advertising ). 

Signal 

controller  Signal misuse  End users  may use signals transmitted by the RAN to 

perform ISAC 

People not 

owning a 

UE 

Data subject  Unawareness of 

involvement 

Just being present under the coverage of a TSSA 

yields possible involvement in a sensing service. 

MNO  Data 

controller  Data misuse 

The operator may not frame correctly the conditions 

of collection and processing of sensing data belonging 

to the served end users as well as people under the 

coverage of its network. 

Provider of 

RAN 

Data 

processor 

Unauthorized data 

collection 

The RAN apparatus may fail to collect data from end 

users and people not owning a UE respecting the 

conditions set by the operator. 

Signal 

controller  Signal misuse  External  attackers  may use signals transmitted by the 

RAN to perform ISAC 

Provider  of 

SSP 

functionality 

Data 

processor 

Unauthorized data 

processing 

The SSP may fail to process collected data from end 

users and people not owning a UE respecting the 

conditions set by the operator and/or may leverage 

external AI/ML tools as well as public cloud 

platforms to process the collected sensing data. 

3-SIDP 

equipment 

Data 

controller  Data misuse 

The platform may not frame correctly the conditions 

of collection and processing of sensing data belonging 

to the sensing targets. 

Data 

processor 

Unintended 

disclosure 

Interfacing with SSP may augment the granularity of 

PII related to the end users and people not owning a 

UE. 

Non -UE 

SSC 

equipment 

Data recipient  Data misuse 

Upon requesting a Sensing Service for a given NF -

side application (e.g.,  traffic flow monitoring on a 

highway ), such data are used for a different purpose 

(e.g.,  tracking the movements of specific individuals 

across multiple locations ).

3-SSC 

platform  Data recipient  Data misuse 

Upon requesting a Sensing Service for a given 

external application (e.g.,  crowd density estimation 

on a university campus ), such data are used for a 

different purpose (e.g.,  identifying and profiling 

individuals attending specific events or gatherings ). 

LAWFUL  ISAC  SOLUTION  FOR  CELLULAR  NETWORKS 

The obligation s by GDPR  of  implementing appropriate technical and  organizational  measures  call for 

dedicated technical solutions  [1, Art. 32] , starting from a suitable  network  architecture able to  handle the sensing information and  confining  its use and diffusion to authorized  parties , thus yielding  lawful 

ISAC technology in cellular networks .

MNO . It has the main responsibility  for  sensing data, since it collects them and decides how to handle 

them. The end user should be entitled to handle sensing data related to him/herself, but, in this case, we 

must ensure that we do not disclose PII of  other  users without their consent. Examples  of  policies  by 

MNO  that are  compatible with the GDPR include: 

1.  supervising the entire  sensing process , also in conjunction with third parties outside the 6GS .

As part of the agreement with the operator, it  holds  responsibility  for  the overall  normative 

compliance  of the service it  provides  to  its subscribers .

2.  restrict ing  sensing data collected to specific areas . We can consider a specific area, e.g., an 

industrial site, or an academic campus, where users have agreed to give access to be tracked in 

their movement, for the operations of the industry or for collection of statistics  on  the campus. 

In this case, the operator discloses only the sensing information relative to the selective area to 

the  3-SSC . In this case, the operator can also support the identification of the targets (thus 

explicitly providing the location and identity of passive users) .

3.  tunable  retention of sensing data . Sensing data can be  processed  immediately after they are 

acquired and then discarded. For example, sensing acquisitions may  be used  to detect obstacles 

and  dangerous situations to assist  live  auto nomous driving,  but then immediately discarded 

after use. 

Person with  UE . Here we consider the UE as an SSC, then providing ISAC data to the end user. 

Although possibly interested in sensing data relative to objects around it, it  would be qu ite problematic 

to  handle  such information, even  setting  a limit on the distance of the  sensing  target from the UE. 

Indeed, such sensing information may be relative to other  people  that are passively tracked, and without 

their explicit  consent,  this should be  prevented .

RAN  equipment  vendor . Vendors should  design and  implement  technical means  comprising, e.g., 

innovative beamforming techniques capable of preventing unauthorized data extraction while 

maintaining ISAC functionality and  CSI -based user location anonymization.  This also  may  call for a 

clear distinction between sensing -capable and sensing -resilient waveforms, where the former are 

deployed exclusively in authorized contexts  – a responsibility that falls directly on the signal controller 

as defined earlier.  In addition, the  signal controller  should be capable of enforcing differentiated service 

level agreements (SLAs) on sensing performance, ensuring that the resolution and quality of sensing 

data are tuned to the minimum necessary for each authorized use case  – in line with the principle of 

data minimization .

SSP  functionality  vendor . As  the entity  responsible for processing sensing data,  it should ensure  da ta 

processing with proper anonymization procedure s. If  a 3-SSC  is  interested, for example, in obtaining statistical data on the traffic conditions of the main roads covered by the network. In this  case,  the  SSP 

may  pre -process locally the information, ensure that processing is anonymized (e.g., with differential 

privacy techniques) and then disclos e the aggregated anonymized data to the third party. In this case, 

the sensing data remains unidentifiable .

3-SIDP platform.  As an authorized external entity providing input sensing data to the 6GS, it must 

ensure that the data it contributes complies with the same privacy standards required within the network. 

When acting as a data controller, it must establish a clear legal ba sis for data collection and ensure 

transparency towards data subjects. When acting as a data processor, it must operate under a formal 

data processing agreement with the MNO, limiting data use strictly to agreed purposes and 

implementing appropriate techni cal safeguards, such as data minimization and anonymization at the 

source. 

Non -UE SSC equipment and 3 -SSC platforms.  As data recipients,  they  must ensure that sensing data 

received from the 6GS is used solely for the declared and agreed purpose. Any further processing or 

storage must comply with GDPR obligations, including maintaining records of processing activities 

and implementing appropriate  security measures. In particular, 3 -SSC platforms operating as over -the -

top service providers must establish explicit data sharing agreements with the MNO, clearly defining 

the scope, retention period, and permitted uses of the received sensing data .

Standardization bodies . They play an important role in defining ISAC functions and their interfaces to 

the rest of the network, in compliance with privacy legislation.  These include  the desi gn of  a)  radio 

signals for ISAC  (data generation and processing ),  b)  dedicated functions to handle the processing and 

transferring of the ISAC information within and outside the network ( data control ),  c) dedicated 

control -plane signals to store, manage, and transfer ISAC information. Such interfaces and 

functionalities enable  MNOs and  ve ndors of  RAN  equipment and UE s to comply with the regulations. 

An example of such  a comprehensive  solution is provided in  [11] .

A summary of the mitigation measures is provided in  Table  2.Table  2: Overview of the mitigation measures  for each identified stakeholder. 

Stakeholder  Mitigation Approach 

MNO  Supervise end -to -end sensing process including third parties; restrict sensing to 

authorized areas; tunable data retention with immediate discard when possible 

Network end users  Restrict UE -side sensing service requests to declared purposes; prevent 

exploitation of RAN signals for unauthorized sensing 

RAN vendor  Sensing -resilient vs sensing -capable waveforms; beamforming techniques to 

prevent unauthorized data extraction; CSI -based user location anonymization; 

restrict sensing -capable signal transmission to authorized contexts 

SSP vendor  Local pre -processing and anonymization before data leaves the network; 

differential privacy for aggregated outputs to third parties 

3-SIDP platform  Formal data processing agreements with MNO; source -level anonymization of 

contributed sensing data; purpose limitation on data provided to SSP 

Non -UE SSC equipment  Purpose limitation enforcement on received sensing data; formal agreements 

defining scope and retention 

3-SSC platform  Explicit data sharing agreements with MNO; strict purpose limitation; defined 

retention periods and permitted uses 

Standardization bodies  Define privacy -compliant ISAC radio signal specifications; standardize 

dedicated functions for ISAC data control; specify control -plane signals for 

storing, managing and transferring ISAC data; enable privacy -by -design 

compliance for MNOs and vendors 

CONCLUSIONS 

Adding ISAC capabilities to 6G networks requires a cohesive tech -policy framework that bridges 

wireless engineering with legal standards.  In this paper, we have analyzed the privacy implications of 

cellular ISAC through the lens of the GDPR, identifying five key privacy threats  — unauthorized data 

collection, unauthorized data processing, data misuse, unawareness of involvement, and unintend ed 

disclosure  — across  all  stakeholder categories.  A key contribution of our analysis is the introduction of 

the signal controller concept, which complements the GDPR stakeholder taxonomy by addressing 

privacy at the physical layer, upstream of data collection. Unlike data controllers and processors, whose 

responsibilities arise once personal data has been collected, the signal controller represents a preventive 

first line of defense against unauthorized sensing . Based on our threat assessment, we have outlined 

mitigation strategies  making ISAC  lawful  at both the technical and organizational levels,  including 

physical layer controls, data anonymization, architectural  ti ering , and MNO policies. Standardization bodies play a particularly important enabling role in this landscape, as embedding privacy -by -design 

principles into 3GPP and ETSI standards ensures that compliance is a structural feature of the 

technology rather than an afterthought. 

Finally, three open research directions deserve attention: the development of a public trust model  [13] 

for ISAC -enabled networks, the alignment of ISAC capabilities with existing lawful  interception 

frameworks  — ensuring that sensing information is made available to legal authorities only upon 

explicit authorized request  — and the evolving interaction between ISAC and AI regulation  [14 , 15 ],

which will require careful monitoring as the legislative landscape matures. 

REFERENCES 

[1] “Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the 

protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement 

of such data, and repealing Directive 95/46/EC (Genera l Data Protection Regulation),” Official Journal 

of the European Union, vol. L 119, pp. 1 –88, May 4, 2016. [Online]. Available:  https://europa.eu 

[2] 3GPP, “Feasibility Study on Integrated Sensing and Communication”, TSG -SA, TR 22.837, 

V19.4.0, Jun. 2024. 

[3] 3GPP, “Service requirements for Integrated Sensing and Communication”, TSG -SA, TS 22.137, 

V19.1.0, Mar. 2024. 

[4] 3GPP, “Study on Integrated Sensing And Communication (ISAC) for NR (Release 20)”, TSG -RAN, 

TR 38.765, V1.1.0, Jun. 2026. 

[5] ETSI, “Integrated Sensing And Communications (ISAC); System and RAN Architectures”, ISG -

ISAC, GR -ISC003, V1.1.1, Feb. 2026. 

[6] NGMN, “Operating disaggregated networks; Operating models  – An introduction #0”, Technical 

report, 2024. [Online] Available at:  https://www.ngmn.org/wp -content/uploads/241218_Operating -

Models -an -Introduction -0_v1.0.pdf 

[7] ETSI, “Integrated Sensing And Communications (ISAC); Security, Privacy, Trustworthiness and 

Sustainability”, ISG -ISAC, GR -ISC004, V1.1.1, Feb. 2026. 

[8] “California Consumer Privacy Act of 2018,” Cal. Civ.  Code § 1798.100 et seq., June 28, 2018. 

[Online].  Available:  https://oag.ca.gov/privacy/ccpa 

[9] “Lei Geral de Proteção de Dados Pessoais (LGPD),” Lei Nº 13.709, de 14 de Agosto de 2018, Diário 

Oficial da União [D.O.U.], Aug. 15, 2018.  [Online]. Available: 

https://www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/_ato2015 -2018/2018/lei/l13709.htm [10] “Directive 2002/58/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 July 2002 concerning 

the processing of personal data and the protection of privacy in the electronic communications sector 

(Directive on privacy and electronic communications),”  Official Journal of the European Communities, 

vol. L 201, pp. 37 –47, July 31, 2002. [Online]. Available:  https://europa.eu 

[11] P. Dass  et al. , “Addressing Privacy Concerns in Joint Communication and Sensing for 6G 

Networks: Challenges and Prospects,” in Proceedings of Privacy Technologies and Policy: 12th Annual 

Privacy Forum, APF 2024, Karlstad, Sweden, September 2024. Springer -Verlag, Berlin,  Heidelberg, 

87 –111. https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-031 -68024 -3_5 

[12] “Regulation (EU) 2023/2854 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 December 2023 

on harmonised rules on fair access to and use of data and amending Regulation (EU) 2017/2394 and 

Directive (EU) 2020/1828 (Data Act),” Official Journal of the  European Union, vol.  L, doc. 2023/2854, 

Dec. 22, 2023.  [Online]. Available:  https://eur -lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2023/2854/oj 

[13] G. P. Fettweis  et al. , “Conceptualizing Trustworthiness and Trust in Communications,” in IEEE 

Communications Magazine, vol. 63, no. 12, pp. 126 -132, December 2025, doi: 

10.1109/MCOM.001.2400383. Available at: 

https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=11078841 

[14] “Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 June 2024 laying 

down harmonised rules on artificial intelligence and amending Regulations (EC) No 300/2008, (EU) 

No 167/2013, (EU) No 168/2013, (EU) 2018/858, (EU) 2018/11 39 and (EU) 2019/2144 and Directives 

2014/90/EU, (EU) 2016/797 and (EU) 2020/1828 (Artificial Intelligence Act),” Official Journal of the 

European Union, vol. L, doc. 2024/1689, July 12, 2024. [Online]. Available:  https://eur -

lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2024/1689/oj 

[15] “Framework Act on the Development of Artificial Intelligence and the Establishment of a 

Foundation for Trustworthiness,” Act No. 20676, Jan. 21, 2025.  [Online]. Available: 

https://elaw.klri.re.kr/eng_service/lawView.do?hseq=71019&lang=ENG